---
inFeed: true
hasPage: true
inNav: false
inLanguage: null
starred: false
keywords: []
description: ''
datePublished: '2016-03-28T02:02:47.879Z'
dateModified: '2016-03-28T02:01:34.717Z'
title: Chapter 6- Rejoice with Trembling
author: []
sourcePath: _posts/2016-02-09-chapter-6-rejoice-with-trembling.md
published: true
authors: []
publisher:
  name: null
  domain: null
  url: null
  favicon: null
url: chapter-6-rejoice-with-trembling/index.html
_type: Article

---
****

**__**

**__**

**_Serve the LORD with
fear, and rejoice with trembling. ~Psalm 2:11_**

Several
summers ago, my wife and I went to a nearby park for the annual 4th of July fireworks show. We got great seats, right on the grassy hill
overlooking the field where they set off the explosives. I love fireworks, and
this year was particularly spectacular. We were enthralled by the show, but
about halfway through the event, an approaching severe thunderstorm forced the
night to end early and sent us all scurrying to our cars.

That
night is burned into my memory because of a vivid shift in perspective that
happened right before the storm hit. We had been sitting on our blankets
marveling at the brightly colored fireworks, but our show was quickly dwarfed
as the rumbling, flashing bank of dark clouds rolled in. I can still remember
seeing the lightning exploding across the sky from a towering bank of storm
clouds behind the fireworks, and all of a sudden, our light show seemed puny by
comparison. Even the noise of "bombs bursting in air" was drowned out by the
rising wind and steady rumbling thunder.

The
incoming storm exposed our fireworks as the silly light show that they really
were. Moments before, we had been amazed by the lights and sounds. But now,
against the backdrop of the approaching storm, our biggest fireworks seemed
like the sparklers that kids hold in the backyard. They just weren't impressive
anymore, overshadowed by a vastly superior spectacle. God's fireworks were,
frankly, much better than ours.

I learned
a valuable lesson that night about worship and the fear of God. I

find myself so often enamored by the world's
toys and distracted from an undivided pursuit of God by admiring the fireworks
of worldly entertainment. The only thing that will set us free from the pursuit
of small-time shows is to behold a vastly superior spectacle.

Jesus
Christ is the greatest spectacle in the universe. His authority, love, power,
holiness, humility, justice, and mercy outshine and overshadow every other
glory. The greatest thrills in the world are like a meager fireworks show
compared to his greatness. The problem is, we're enamored by our own light
shows and toys. "Then you shall see and be radiant; your heart shall thrill and
exult," Isaiah 60:5 says about the sight of this glory. He is more thrilling
than the cheap toys that compete for our attention. What we need is a shift in
perspective, to see our pursuits and desires and hobbies and entertainment in
the light of his overwhelming beauty.

****

**HOLY, HOLY, HOLY**

Isaiah
got a glimpse of this spectacle one day in a vision that changed the course of
his life and ministry. While I don't anticipate getting the same kind of vision
that rocked his world, I trust that God put this account into his Word so that
the Holy Spirit could take the truth here and rock my world and yours as well
with the same power that changed Isaiah. 

__

_In the year that
King Uzziah died, I saw the Lord sitting upon a throne, high and lifted up; and
the train of his robe filled the temple. Above him stood the seraphim. Each had
six wings: with two he covered his face, and with two he covered his feet, and
with two he flew. And one called to the other and said, "Holy, holy, holy is
Yahweh Almighty; the whole earth is full of his glory!" And the foundations of
the thresholds shook at the voice of him who called, and the house was filled
with smoke._

Isaiah
tells us that this vision came during a time of change and turmoil in the
kingdom. King Uzziah, who had loved the Lord and presided over a long era of
national prosperity, had died. But in the midst of mourning and change, Isaiah
saw a glimpse of the undying King who was still sitting on his throne, still
ruling over his universe. When it says that "the train of his robe filled the
temple," we're supposed to get a picture of how spectacularly massive this king
is; the fringe of his garment fills the entire room. This brings to mind King
Solomon's words at the dedication of the temple: "Heaven and the highest heaven
cannot contain you, how much less this house I have built!" Seeing God face to
face, Isaiah must have recognized the reality of those words; this grand temple
that served as the center of Israel's worship couldn't even contain the corner
of the King's royal robes. All the systems of worship built around the temple
must have seemed ludicrously insufficient in that moment as Isaiah gazed on the
King, high and lifted up. Our songs don't do him justice, our sacrifices don't supply
anything to him, our services barely scratch the surface of who he is. A
shrinking feeling must have come over Isaiah in that moment as he realized that
all of his life of ministry and service didn't add anything to this King, as if
he needed anything. That's where true worship starts: realizing that the King
doesn't need you, but that you need the King.

All
around the King, Isaiah saw heavenly beings flying and endlessly singing
praise. The word "seraphim" in Hebrew literally means "burning ones." Throughout
Scripture, the appearance of these flaming angelic beings was enough to send
mortals cowering to the ground, but they themselves are obviously overcome by
the far superior spectacle of the King. Their strange appearance makes that
clear: "Each had six wings: with two he covered his face, and with two he
covered his feet, and with two he flew." Two wings covered the angels' eyes,
because even these "burning ones" could not look full on into the consuming
fire of God's holiness and survive. So they shield their eyes from the
brightness of his glory. Two other wings cover their feet, lest they disrespect
God by trampling his glorious presence. This brings to mind Moses standing
before the flaming presence of God, and God telling him: 

__

_"Do not come near;
take your sandals off your feet, for the place on which you are standing is
holy ground." And Moses hid his face, for he was afraid to look at God. ~Exodus
3:5-6_

Moses was
right to strip off his dirty shoes and shield his eyes; not even the heavenly
Burning Ones dare to look at God or get too close. And yet, even at their safe
distance, they cannot help but endlessly worship the One they catch glimpses
of. "Holy, holy, holy is Yahweh Almighty!" they cry. "The whole earth is full
of his glory!"

When the
flaming angels proclaim, "Holy, holy, holy!" they are doing more than just
repetition for the sake of redundancy. In Hebrew poetry, repeating something
twice adds emphasis; repeating something three times emphasizes the emphasis,
making it urgent and absolute. Saying something once, twice, or three times in
the Bible is like this:

Once-
beautiful

Twice- 

**very beautiful**

Three times- 

**__MOST PERFECTLY BEAUTIFUL!__**

So when
the angels say, "Holy, holy, holy," they are shouting in bold, uppercase,
underlined letters, "

**_HE IS
ABSOLUTELY, PERFECTLY, INFINITELY, BREATHTAKINGLY HOLY!_**

" Do they have
your attention yet? They continue: "the entire world is filled with his glory,
with the radiance of his perfection!" The Self-Existent One, they say, is
infinitely holy, and the echo of his beauty and worth fills all of creation.

The word
"holy" doesn't just mean "morally perfect" like many people think it does.
Rather, the word "holy" has the idea of being set apart, different, unstained,
pure. The truth that God is holy means, in addition to him being morally
perfect, that he is utterly unique, set apart, and different. He is in a class
by himself. He is utterly unlike us, exalted high above our ability to
comprehend. "As the heavens are higher than the earth, so are my ways higher
than your ways and my thoughts than your thoughts," he says in Isaiah 55\.
That's a picture of just one facet of his holiness: comparing his thinking to
our thinking is like comparing an inch to a light year, or a candle to a
supernova. He is unique and set apart, different. Two chapters later, God is
described like this: "the One who is high and lifted up, who inhabits eternity,
whose name is Holy." He is exalted far above us, and even exists outside of
time---he "inhabits eternity." All of this is summed up in the phrase, "whose
name is Holy." His name, his very essence, is set-apartness.

Isaiah,
confronted with this set-apart One, the Holy King that even the Burning Ones
fear, fell on his face in terror.

__

_And I said: "Woe is
me! For I am lost; for I am a man of unclean lips, and I dwell in the midst of
a people of unclean lips; for my eyes have seen the King, Yahweh Almighty!"_

"I am
lost!" Isaiah cried. Other translations render that as, "I am undone," or "I am
ruined." The Hebrew word that Isaiah uses has the idea of coming apart, of
being destroyed. "I am wrecked," he says, "because I am a man of unclean lips."
In the piercing blaze of the King's holiness, Isaiah becomes keenly aware of
his own sinfulness. This is especially poignant considering that in the
previous chapter, Isaiah had leveled "woe" after "woe" against God's rebellious
people. Six times in chapter 5 he pronounced prophetic woes against the rich
who forsake God's ways, the sinners who indulge themselves, the evil people who
love their sin, the moral relativists who call good evil and evil good, and
those who trust and admire their own wisdom. But now the light of God's
holiness is turned on him, and he pronounces his seventh woe... against himself.
"Woe is me!" is all he can say. He has been broken by the sin he sees all
around him, but now in God's presence, he is broken by the sin he sees in
himself.

In this
moment, as he sees his own sin in stark relief against God's dangerous
perfection, he knows there is no hope for him. "I'm lost, undone, wrecked,
because I'm a sinner in a land of sinners, and I've seen the King face to
face!" He has done what the angels dare not do; he has looked straight on the
face of Yahweh, and he knows he is ruined. Like a twig cast into the fire, he
expects to be turned to ash and annihilated by the consuming fire he sees.

That's
why what happens next is so surprising. Isaiah experiences not annihilation but
atonement; not destruction but deliverance.

__

_Then one of the
seraphim flew to me, having in his hand a burning coal that he had taken with
tongs from the altar. And he touched my mouth and said, "Behold, this has
touched your lips; your guilt is taken away, and your sin atoned for."_

The fiery
angel goes to the altar---the place of sacrifice---and carefully picks up a coal
with tongs. I find that fascinating; this altar, this sacrifice, is too hot for
even the Burning Ones to touch. And yet this supernaturally hot coal is seared
right onto Isaiah's lips, a gracious, cleansing branding. What remains is a
scar of sinlessness: "Your guilt is taken away, and your sin is atoned for."

What is
this coal, this sacrifice that angels cannot approach and yet takes away the guilt
of sinners? Could it be that what Isaiah is experiencing here is the power of
the cross applied to his guilty lips? The sacrifice of Christ is what "angels
long to look into" (1 Peter 1:12), and Hebrews 10:19 tells us that only the
blood of Jesus gives us access into the holy presence of God. And so Isaiah's
only hope, even 700 years before the Savior arrives, is that God will relate to
him on the basis of that future sacrifice. Here in Isaiah we have a picture of
the grace that each of us who are in Christ have experienced: we are ruined,
guilty sinners in the presence of the King, but have been seared into
sinlessness, branded by the blood of Jesus---and all our guilt is gone.

FRIGHTENING
OR FUN?

Now let
me stop and ask an important question. On Sunday morning, when you enter church
and gather with believers to sing praise to this great King, you are coming
right into God's holy presence. Psalm 22:3 says that God is "enthroned on the
praises" of his people. That means that the sanctuary on Sunday morning is holy
ground---heaven's throne room. If, during the week, you gather with your small
group and begin with a couple worship songs, your living room is now a throne
room. God---the same God that Isaiah saw---is present among you. So what is your
response to that reality? Is your response anything like Isaiah's?

There
should be a real sense of trembling when we come into God's holy presence to
worship him. He is not a small god; he is not a tame lion. He is not like us,
and he is not safe. In Leviticus 10, two sons of the high priest Aaron presumed
to disregard the safety precautions that God had instituted for sinful people
to approach him, and "offered unauthorized fire before Yahweh. And fire came
out from before Yahweh and consumed them, and they died before Yahweh"
(Leviticus 10:1-2). God struck them down for their cavalier approach to
worship. God's explanation to their father, Aaron, was unapologetic: "Among
those who are near me I will be treated as holy, and before all the people I
will be glorified" (10:3). Or else.

And yet,
I've got to be honest: I don't get the sense---in my own heart or from those
around me---that we're particularly concerned about God being treated as holy
when we're singing on Sunday mornings. Aaron's sons were struck down for
offering unauthorized sacrifices; I wonder what the King thinks about the songs
we sing? Are we deeply concerned with singing rightly and biblically, honoring
God with accurate words about him and emotions that match the truth we
proclaim? Or do we want to be "entertained" by worship?

How do
you think about worship at your church? "That was a fun song!" "The band really
rocked today." "I didn't really like the songs we sang." "I was distracted
during worship." These betray our entertainment-centered vision of worship; we
view worship as being about us and our comforts and needs and emotions, instead
of being about the Holy One to whom we sing. We should tremble at such
outrageous abuse of our privileged access to the throne of grace.

THE ONLY
REASON YOU'RE NOT STRUCK DEAD FOR SINGING

The
sobering reality of our worship is this: the only difference between us and
Aaron's sons is not that we're somehow offering better worship than they did.
The only difference is that Jesus was struck dead in our place. The only reason
that you're not struck dead for your half-hearted singing is that the wrath of
God fell on Jesus instead of you. Rather, you have been granted extraordinary,
unparalleled, undeserved access: the God whom Isaiah saw has welcomed you into
free, unfettered fellowship with himself. 

That is the
frightening privilege that you have as a believer who, like Isaiah, has been
branded by the blood of Jesus. You have access that ancient Israel could only
dream of: access into the Most Holy Place, the very presence of God. Hebrews
10:19-22 opens the door for us to approach God himself:

__

_Therefore, brothers,
since we have confidence to enter the holy places by the blood of Jesus, by the
new and living way that he opened for us through the curtain, that is, through
his flesh, and since we have a great priest over the house of God, let us draw
near with a true heart in full assurance of faith, with our hearts sprinkled
clean from an evil conscience and our bodies washed with pure water._

You have
access to God that Isaiah could only dream of. God has promised to hear all
your prayers (John 14:14), accept all your praise and sacrifice (1 Peter 2:5),
never leave your side (Hebrews 13:5), always be with you (Matthew 28:20), take
up holy residence in your heart (John 14:17), and welcome you as blameless into
his glorious presence (Jude 24). Every one of those blessings was purchased at
great cost by the Son of God who bore every one of your failures to
appropriately honor and treasure the great worth of God. When Hebrews 10 says
that we have confidence to enter the holy places "through the curtain, that is,
through the flesh," that means that we draw near to God through nail wounds,
spilled blood, and torn flesh. That is the violent, costly grace that paid for
your singing on Sunday morning. The cross is the only "safety precaution" we
have, and the only safety precaution we need, when approaching God.

FEARFUL
GLADNESS

Those
twin realities---the dangerous holiness of God and the violent grace that paved
the way for you to enjoy fellowship with God forever---are at the heart of what a
lifestyle of biblical worship looks like. Psalm 2:11 describes it like this:

__

_Serve Yahweh with
fear, and rejoice with trembling._

"Rejoice
with trembling"---only those who, like Isaiah, have been branded with the blood
of Jesus can understand that contradictory emotion. Fearful gladness is the only
appropriate response for those who have been rescued with a violent grace:
gladness at the rescue, fear at the cost. So what does fearful gladness look
like?

In Isaiah
chapter 8, we are told that our response to this Holy One is supposed to be the
same as the Burning Ones who never cease to cry, "Holy, holy, holy!" "Yahweh
Almighty, him you shall honor as holy" (Isaiah 8:13). It means, he's not like
you, so don't treat him like he is. His thoughts are light years above our own;
give him the respect that someone like that deserves. He is unveiled brightness
and blinding perfection; don't treat him as common or ordinary. He's not common
or ordinary; he is exceptionally, infinitely valuable---and our own values
systems should reflect that. 

What does
that look like practically? It means giving the highest possible respect to his
words, because Infinite Wisdom has spoken to us. It means striving to obey him,
because Infinite Purity has commanded us. It means worshipping him with the joy
and passion he deserves, because Infinite Beauty has revealed himself to us. It
means grieving our sin and loving his mercy, because Infinite Grace has shed
his blood to forgive us. It means trusting him completely, because Infinite
Faithfulness has made unbreakable promises to us. It means pressing on to know
him and be with him, because Infinite Worth has invited us into relationship
with him.

And it
means having the same response that Isaiah had. Isaiah's worship in that moment
wasn't bored, distracted singing. It wasn't even happy clapping and dancing.
After the terror of seeing the King's face and the King's unexpected pardon
came the invitation from the King:

__

_And I heard the
voice of the Lord saying, "Whom shall I send, and who will go for us?" Then I
said, "Here am I, send me." ~Isaiah 6:8_

Isaiah's
response to the holiness of God was, "I will go wherever you send me." Real
worship is more than a song; it is a living sacrifice (Romans 12:2) that lays
down everything at the feet of the Holy One and says, "Use me." Isn''t that
what Psalm 2:11 means? "

_Serve _

Yahweh
with fear; 

_rejoice _

with trembling."
True worship is both a fearful serving and a trembling rejoicing. It trembles
in wonder that the Holy One has rescued us, and then takes the news of that
great rescue to a world that needs to hear it. That means the worship service
doesn't end when you walk out the doors of the church; that's when the truest worship
begins. ![](https://the-grid-user-content.s3-us-west-2.amazonaws.com/9a026b76-9775-43bb-8bd9-fd7bfb748f12.jpg)